In my conversations with Udacity students over the years,
something I've heard again and again is that people switching career tracks or even
just acquainting themselves with new fields can experience issues with self-confidence.
They often doubt that they've developed sword expertise,
feel like they don't belong in their new line of
work and attribute success they experience to luck,
rather than their own effort and progress.
It's like their sense of identity hasn't yet caught up with the growth they've undergone,
this is called impostor syndrome.
The good news is that it's super normal to feel this way,
and it's something you can work through if you experience it.
So true.
I taught a coding bootcamp before and nearly every one of my students admitted to
me at some point that they couldn't imagine doing data science for a living,
or getting a job in the field that they really wanted.
One of my students made beautiful map visualizations
and still insisted that he couldn't imagine himself getting a job.
Another one of my students wrote efficient, well-documented code,
but she still told me that she felt like she had to work a
lot harder to prove herself because she didn't
have the right background or the right credentials from the right university.
How about you Eddie? You've done a ton of
online learning and you've switched fields yourself.
Have you ever felt something like this before?
Yeah, definitely. I felt it too,
when I enrolled in my first Udacity Nanodegree program friends would ask me,
"What's new with you or what are you up to these days?"
I would get pretty self-conscious and mumble something like,
"Well, I'm studying something online, some data stuff."
Then they would stare at the floor before changing the subject to,
"Enough about me, how about you?"
Oh my gosh. Yeah, impostor syndrome is a really,
really tricky problem to handle.
If someone tells you, "Just believe in yourself," that may
not necessarily help because the question is how,
how do you shake the voices inside your head and build up your own confidence?
For me, what helped me handle the self-doubt was to
put that question aside and instead ask myself some different questions.
If I somehow knew that in the future I was going
to be in my ideal job doing cool things for work,
what would I be doing these next six months,
one year, and two years to get there?
As a follow-up question I would ask myself,
what would I be doing today?
Yeah, that sounds helpful in getting yourself comfortable with trying
new things and going after your goals even if they seem out of reach right now.
I've also battled some really intense impostor syndrome,
as a woman in physics, a self-taught programmer
and an educator with a nontraditional background.
Wow. How did you find ways to deal with that?
I still struggle with it sometimes,
sometimes daily, but I found some strategies useful when trying to combat it.
For example, if I'm feeling like a fraud in my work,
I'll try to imagine how I might respond if someone else other than
me with the same skill set was doubting themselves in the way that I do.
Yeah, I can imagine we're usually harder on ourselves and more forgiving of others.
Definitely.
So it helps to think of how we treat someone else who was in our same position.
Totally. Similar to what you were saying, I've worked really,
really hard to become more comfortable with risk-taking,
receiving feedback, and just putting myself out there.
Pushing myself outside my comfort zone this way felt totally terrifying at first,
I made it more palatable by reminding myself of a few things.
Number one, my belief that I can't succeed is not objective reality,
it's just a thought that I can make fade over time.
Number two, my brain and everyone else's brains are capable of
unbounded growth and feeling challenged often indicates that I am making progress.
Number three, my career development and the impact I want to have through
my work are way more important than a bit of discomfort on my end.
So reconnecting with my own goals puts all of this in context.